
Module 4,5 :







In Python, control statements are programming constructs that determine the order in which instructions are executed within a program. They allow for decision-making, repetition, and managing the flow of execution, enabling programs to respond dynamically to conditions and perform complex tasks.
There are several types of control statements in Python: Conditional Statements (Selection Control).
These statements allow the program to execute different blocks of code based on whether a certain condition is true or false. 
if statement: Executes a block of code if a condition is true.
if-else statement: Executes one block of code if a condition is true, and another block if the condition is false.
if-elif-else statement: Allows for multiple conditions to be checked sequentially, executing the block of code corresponding to the first true condition.
match-case statement (Python 3.10+): Provides pattern matching for more complex conditional logic, similar to switch-case in other languages.
Python

    age = 20
    if age >= 18:
        print("Adult")
    else:
        print("Minor")
Looping Statements (Repetition Control).
These statements allow a block of code to be executed repeatedly.
for loop: Iterates over a sequence (e.g., list, tuple, string, range) and executes a block of code for each item.
while loop: Repeatedly executes a block of code as long as a condition remains true.
Python

    for i in range(3):
        print(i)

    count = 0
    while count < 3:
        print(count)
        count += 1
loop control statements.
These statements are used within loops to modify their behavior.
break statement: Terminates the loop prematurely and transfers control to the statement immediately following the loop.
continue statement: Skips the rest of the current iteration of a loop and proceeds to the next iteration.
pass statement: A null operation; it does nothing. It can be used as a placeholder where a statement is syntactically required but no action is desired.
Python

    for i in range(5):
        if i == 2:
            continue  # Skips printing 2
        if i == 4:
            break    # Exits the loop before printing 4
        print(i)
Control statements are essential for creating dynamic and functional Python programs, enabling them to make decisions, perform repetitive tasks, and handle various scenarios effectively.